Mercer Island School District
4160 86th Ave SE, Mercer Island, WA 98040
Board of Directors Regular Meeting (Thursday, August 29, 2024)
Generated by Michelle Mueller, Executive Assistant to the Superintendent, on Thursday, August 29, 2024.
    MEETING MINUTES
1. Opening Items (4:00 p.m.)
A. Call to Order (Google Meet Link)
President Lurie called the regular meeting to order at 4:01 p.m.
  Attendees:
  President Deborah Lurie
Director Jody Lee
Director Cristina Martinez
Director Maggie Tai Tucker (remotely)
Superintendent Fred Rundle
Student Board Representative Ava Zhang
Student Board Representative-Elect Lucy Dorer
Executive Director Erin Battersby
Executive Director Nova Williams
Director Kay Adams
Director Tony Kuhn
Assistant Director Jacquie Garcia-Fauver
Communications Coordinator Ian Henry
  Vice President Dan Glowitz was unable to attend.
  B. Establishment of Agenda
MSC Lee/Tucker to establish the agenda. Advisory Vote 1-0. Vote 4-0.
Motion passed.
  2. Study Session (4:00 - 5:30 p.m.)
A. Board Policy 1800 OE-11: Facilities and Capital Assets - Concept Design Overview (4:00 p.m.)
Ms. Brandy Fox, Owner's Representative, reviewed the timeline for concept design and bond issuance with reference to the presentation attached to the agenda. Concrete figures will be reported to the board in October. Some discussion occurred around the construction timeline, with Ms. Fox confirming that on-site construction will likely impact one academic year. Ms. Fox reviewed estimated School Construction Assistance Program funding, including the lack of guarantees offered by OSPI. She noted that the architect teams are seeking board direction on their respective projects.
No action was taken.
  B. Board Policy 1800 OE-11: Facilities and Capital Assets - Concept Design Update from Mithun (4:15 p.m.)
Ms. Fox, Mithun representatives Brendan Connolly and JoAnn Wilcox, IMS Co-Principal Mary Jo Budzius, and IMS teacher Doug Davis provided a concept design update to the Board with reference to the presentation attached to the agenda. Mithun representatives reviewed activity to date and referenced key design considerations (e.g., security, flow, consolidation, including building community and operational efficiency). Mithun representatives presented details around two design options as noted below.
  1. Stitch
Secure, exterior courtyard
Interior, collaborative learning spaces
STEM and related spaces connected to outdoor space to expand learning opportunities.
Performance space near front entrance with easy access from parking lot and community hub/gym
Relocate administration offices to the front to create a more welcoming space.
Relocate library and counseling and repurpose existing spaces into classrooms.
  2. Butterfly
Flow centered around interior courtyard space
Locations of administration offices, performance and counseling spaces are similar to Stitch.
Similar shared spaces for social and learning opportunities compared to Stitch.
  Some discussion occurred around connecting the indoor and outdoor spaces and how students moving through these spaces might impact cooling the building, especially considering rising temperatures, and the costs associated in doing so. Drainage and coverage during heavy rain was also addressed.
  IMS Administrators discussed their preference for the Stitch model, and Mithun reviewed preliminary cost models suggesting that Stitch outperforms Butterfly quite considerably. Lastly, Mithun representatives reviewed some "add on" considerations that might add impact and value to the community (e.g., additional parking). They will continue to refine the options and return in October for a further update. Some discussion occurred around how a determination will be made and use or lack thereof of courtyard space at MIHS (for comparison purposes).
No action was taken.
  C. Board Policy 1800 OE-11: Facilities and Capital Assets - Concept Design Update from Mahlum Architects (4:45 p.m.)
Ms. Fox, Mahlum Architect representatives David Mount, Becky Hutchinson, and Sunny Zhang discussed concept design options with the Board with reference to the video and slide deck attached to the agenda. Mahlum Architect representatives noted that the video provided details around the concept design options and had been provided to the Board to view in advance of the meeting. This was an opportunity to address any questions around potential project pairings, offer cost estimates and confirm the direction for next steps. Mahlum representatives began by reviewing projects deemed "not doable." Some discussion occurred around clean energy adoption and the District's compliance with state requirements. It was noted that, in determining a cost analysis, Mahlum considered project scope and constructability and prepared the analysis in today's dollars. The project is anticipated forty months out, requiring the addition of a cost escalation factor. Mahlum representatives sought feedback in order to move forward with the next phase of prioritizing projects in order to make a recommendation to the Board.
  Discussion occurred around the following projects.
  Cost and variables in upgrading the HVAC system.
Possibility of relocating Radio and Broadcasting and reconfiguring the space into a Robotics lab, including extending the classroom by allowing for access to outdoor space. Alternatively, the current Robotics space could be expanded by taking spacing from an adjacent classroom.
Inclusive bathrooms, which were discussed in the video presentation, and safety considerations in the design.
JV field renovation, creating a multiuse field for year-round use, lined for soccer, football, and lacrosse. It was noted that the upper north field doesn't drain well, and there were questions around why this wasn't being considered. A renovation of the JV field would add flexibility and likely lead to decreased use of the north field. President Lurie also noted that the recent renovation of the S. Mercer Playfields was designed for high school use and that students dissatisfied with the on-campus fields have other options.
Absent from the project pairings is a cover for the stadium, which President Lurie felt would generate questions from community members. Superintendent Rundle provided details on the immensity of such a project, with an estimated a cost of between 25-50 million. The likelihood of such a project receiving approval was small compared to other projects, therefore, it was removed from consideration. 
  It was determined that Mahlum Architects would progress to the prioritization phase. Additional discussion occurred around the timing of multiple projects, whether these will be staggered approach or tackled simultaneously. Ms. Fox noted that the project list is extensive, and it would not be anticipated that all projects would be completed. Mahlum representatives indicated that projects would be done in incremental steps due to the need to house students, and the sequence would be determined once the Board prioritizes the projects to pursue in the fall. 
  No action was taken.
  D. Board Policy 1800 OE-11: Facilities and Capital Assets - Board Discussion and Direction (5:15 p.m.)
The Board agreed by consensus that both architect teams were on right track with goal of getting to a decision in Nov/Dec in advance of bond issuance. There was Board consensus to move forward to the next phase for both IMS and MIHS. President Lurie suggested removing the Tier 1 HVAC option from the table given the lack of viability and leave only Tier 2 and Tier 3 options for consideration. Directors agreed to table the Tier 1 option. Superintendent Rundle reminded the Board that the numbers will make more sense when Piper Sandler returns to introduce cost pacing, tax implications, bond stacking, etc. Having these figures will help in determining what the community will support.
No action was taken.
  Lurie called a recess at 5:39 p.m.
Meeting resumed at 5:48 p.m.
  3. Partial Governance Process Monitoring
A. Board Policy 1800 OE-6: Budgeting/Financial Planning - Update on 2023-2024 Financial Dashboard and June and July 2024 Budget Status Reports
Director Adams noted that SPED costs had increased due to some large, unplanned bills which were received. She noted further that funding for many of these costs will be recovered when approximately $2.6 million in Safety Net funds are received from the State in August. She also acknowledged that approximately $525,000 was not transferred to General Fund. Director Adams will be remedying this error.
  Director Adams discussed a change by the State in the Safety Net threshold for all school districts, increasing that threshold from $30,000 to $40,000. This translates to spending an additional $10,000 per student before the District is eligible to receive Safety Net funding. With a number of students qualifying, this resulted in a substantial financial impact on the District. The other challenge with Safety Net funding is that the District must spend the money over the course of the school year and wait for reimbursement in August. Reimbursement is received at a rate of approximately 95%.
  Director Adams relayed that there was no growth in the District's fund balance due to 1) increased SPED costs; 2) increased utility costs amounting to $294,000, despite effective energy savings efforts instituted by the District; and 3) increased insurance costs totaling $67,000. Utilities and insurance are areas where State funding has not kept pace with increases in cost. The ending fund balance is anticipated to end at $2.6 million, or 3.4 - 3.5%. Superintendent Rundle highlighted that the District is one of only a few school districts not currently spending into reserves and noted that the legislative priorities adopted by the Board targeting increased transportation, special education, and MSOC funding as well as funding based on employee experience factor are a step in the right direction.
  Some discussion occurred around a coding area on the graph for July, which Director Adams indicated will be updated for August. Superintendent Rundle also reminded the Board that the District will receive apportionment funding at 10% in August. Pursuant to a question by President Lurie, Director Adams noted that she will determine if Safety Net reimbursement in August is a federal or State requirement.
No action was taken.
  B. Board Policy 1008: Annual Agenda Planning - Annual Agenda Planning Calendar for 2024-2025 (1008 P, 2nd rdg)
Director Martinez shared that, pursuant to feedback at the August 8 board meeting, she suggests planning a tentative meeting in July prior to the WSSDA amendment period, which has historically fallen between August 1 and 15 annually. Ms. Mueller noted that a special meeting/study session for this purpose has already been included for July 31 on the 1008 P planning calendar. She will update to include "as needed."
  Director Martinez noted that January 27 is "no school day" for students/PD day and requested that the study session planned for this day be moved to a different day. Proposed dates, as included on the agenda, included February 3 and February 24. As the 3rd conflicts with NSBA, as noted on the calendar, the Board agreed by consensus to reschedule for February 24.
  Board directors expressed appreciation for the new chronological, color coded format of the 1008 P planning calendar.
  Director Lee requested the Board shift its February 13 meeting to Wednesday, February 12 with 6:00 p.m. start time. Director Tucker indicated that her class ends at 5:30 p.m., so she will join the beginning of the meeting from her car as she drives to the Island.
  Director Martinez noted that she has conflicts with several meetings that will require her to phone in while en route for the start of impacted meetings.
  MSC Martinez/Lee to approve 1008 P with the proposed changes. Advisory Vote 1-0. Vote 4-0.
Motion passed.
  C. Post-Monitoring Language Review - Board Policy 1800 OE-10: Instructional Program
At the Board's last meeting on August 8, Superintendent Rundle verbally proposed language updates for OE-10, items 2 and 9, which the Board found reasonable. The language is being presented today for formal approval.
MSC Lee/Martinez to approve the new language/levels for monitoring for OE-10, items 2 and 9. Advisory Vote 1-0. Vote 4-0.
Motion passed.
  D. Board Policy 1003: Board Job Description - Board Discussion on Naming of District Facilities Policy
Superintendent Rundle presented a draft proposal for a naming committee as well as a proposed first meeting, following recruitment, in October with updates in March and as needed. He requested feedback on the framework as well as whether the Board prefers a comprehensive committee or a Board committee of two. President Lurie expressed concern about limited community involvement in the proposed framework and suggested representation be increased to include multiple community representatives in each of several categories [e.g., 3-4 community members who are also MISD alums, 1-2 community members who are not MISD alums, 1-2 alums who are no longer Island residents (recent graduate, less recent graduate/senior alum)]. President Lurie also noted that she received a letter from the Mercer Island Historical Society seeking to offer its perspective on a possible naming policy and suggested that the committee might discuss bringing in additional alums or community members to provide their insight. Director Tucker felt hearing from former teachers and/or principals could be helpful and expressed an interest in having middle school students represented as well.
  Superintendent Rundle affirmed that, should the Board elect a comprehensive committee, board representatives would need to be selected, and the superintendent would consult with them to determine committee members. A survey could be distributed to seek community and alumni representatives. The Board agreed by consensus to move forward with a District-directed committee. Superintendent Rundle indicated that selection of the board directors who will serve on the naming committee will be added to the September 11 meeting agenda. Director Lee inquired about the time commitment as she does not want to occupy too much staff time on this topic. Superintendent Rundle had not completed a time analysis but felt that the majority of the work would be performed by committee members in between meetings. Positions on the proposed framework were intentionally left open and need not be assigned to staff/administrators. He will consider this and present further thoughts at the Board's next meeting. Some discussion occurred around whether one or two board directors will serve on the committee, with the Board agreeing to two directors. Director Martinez recalled that Vice President Glowitz expressed an interest in serving. She would be willing to serve should he no longer be interested. Further discussion occurred around whether the committee with be facilitated by the superintendent or board, with the Board agreeing to a superintendent directed committee with Superintendent Rundle and a director serving as co-chairs. Director Tucker offered to serve as the co-chair. Superintendent Rundle emphasized that the committee will not have decision making authority but will make a recommendation to the Board for action.
No action was taken.
  E. Board Policy 1800 OE-9: Communication and Support to the Board - Superintendent’s Recommended Policy Revisions to Board Policy 3231: Student Records (1st rdg)
Executive Director Battersby discussed policy updates which reflect limits to withholding a student's diploma due to outstanding fees or fines. The Board agreed to approve the proposed policy changes rather than to hold a second reading.
MSC Lee/Tucker to approve Board Policy 3231 as proposed. Advisory Vote 1-0. Vote 4-0.
Motion passed.
  4. Public Input & Superintendent Report (6:00 p.m.)
A. Public Input
The Board heard no public input.
  B. Superintendent Report
Superintendent Rundle acknowledged District custodians for their hard work over the summer as well as the leadership team for their efforts leading up to the start of school. Additionally, he further acknowledged our veterans in recognition of the upcoming Labor Day holiday, spoke on Suicide Prevention Month in September and discussed Gun Storage Check Week, which was celebrated June 1 through 7, 2024. Superintendent Rundle thanked the calendar bargaining team as well, noting that school calendars through the 2026-2027 school year will be published on the District's website soon.
  Mr. Henry highlighted the District's 2024-2025 Communications Plan, attached to the agenda, noting the following.
Building photo archive for use in marketing and promotional materials.
Acknowledged a great Mercer Island Reporter article on the IMS e-Sports team. The reporter who wrote that article will be writing 8 in-depth stories on our schools, Crest, and COT. She will offer a different voice/perspective/angle than that of the building/District.
Ian will begin meeting regularly with elementary school administrators/staff to share smaller stories at this level.
District will host an open house for the Mercer Island Preschool Association prior to the date families must make a preschool commitment to advocate for feeding into the District come kindergarten.
  Mr. Henry added for interest that Fox 13 will be doing 2-minute segment on the MIHS Marching Band on September 8. It will air during the NFL game.
  Superintendent Rundle offered new enrollment highlights as follows.
Last year's kindergarten class ended at 187 students. The District typically sees a bump in enrollment when these kindergartners move up to first grade. Current first grade enrollment is 216 students.
Kindergarten enrollment is also at 216. If historical trends continue, the District anticipates increasing enrollment for first grade.
Other elementary grades report more new students than withdrawals.
IMS reports 75 new students and 37 withdrawals.
MIHS reports over 90 new students.
There are 45 students registered through open enrollment, with 13 in grade 8 and the remainder in grades 9 through 12. Students home districts are split fairly evenly between east and west of the Island.
  Student Representative Zhang and Ava and Representative-Elect Dorer spoke about an event designed to welcome new students to MIHS, with 35 new students participating.
  Student Representative Zhang spoke about attending the National Student Board Member Association (NSBMA) virtual conference. While much of the material was familiar to her as the senior student board representative, she recommends the program for incoming junior student representatives. Student-Elect Dorer also attended. She noted that, while she was well prepared from her onboarding with Superintendent Rundle and Representative Zhang, she felt the the policy development sessions.
  They spoke further about the implementation of the new "no cell phone" policy at MIHS, indicating that the transition is going well. They expressed that parking continues to remain challenging and applauded Link Crew for a great freshman orientation.
  Superintendent Rundle concluded by sharing the contents of a letter received by MIHS Principal Nick Wold from a 2024 graduate. He felt the letter was a testament to what District educators do for our students and how respectful our students are.
  5. Full Governance Process Monitoring
A. Board Policy 1008: Annual Agenda Planning (L-1)
President Lurie briefly reviewed the policy requirements.
MSC Lee/Martinez to find the Board in compliance with Board Policy 1008 as presented. Advisory Vote 1-0. Vote 4-0.
Motion passed.
  6. Consent Agenda
A. Approval of Consent Agenda
MSC Lee/Martinez to approve the Consent Agenda as published. Advisory Vote 1-0. Vote 4-0.
Motion passed.
B. Warrants
C. Personnel Report
D. Regular Meeting Minutes (08/08/2024)
E. Out of Endorsement Report
F. Board Policy 1800 OE-10: Instructional Program - Transitional Bilingual Grant Application Approval
G. Board Policy 1800 OE-10: Instructional Program - Minimum Basic Education Requirement Compliance Report
H. Board Policy 1800 OE-11: Facilities and Capital Assets - Approval of Construction Consultant Contract with CPM, Inc.
I. Board Policy 1800 OE-6: Budgeting/Financial Planning - First Amendment to City-District Interlocal Agreement for Fuel Purchase
  7. Items Removed from Consent Agenda
No items were removed from the consent agenda.
  8. Superintendent Announcements
A. Announcements
Superintendent Rundle had no further announcements.
  9. Board Announcements, Inquiries and Reports
A. Legislative Report
Director Lee reported she and Director Martinez had been busy going through WSSDA General Assembly Handbook and had met yesterday with other Eastside legislative representatives to discuss shared interests and approaches to amendment proposals.
  Director Martinez discussed the following in more detail.
A proposed amendment would add language prohibiting WSSDA from advocating for any legislation that is an unfunded mandate. Some representatives believe this will limit the ability of WSSDA to advocate.
The language of the student by-law change proposal, supported by the Board at the June 20, 2024, meeting, has been condensed to a single paragraph.
  She indicated that they will share a document outlining areas of interest and concern at the next board meeting.
  Director Lee expressed concern that the proposal to remove "race" from the definition of "equity" might be problematic. She felt modifying the definition to "personal circumstances" could impact operations and advocacy efforts. The intent behind the proposal was to include circumstances around special needs.
  She indicated that they are working on completing a document outlining how she recommends voting on behalf of the Board. Most recommendations align with WSSDA but not all. She is seeking affirmation from the Board that it supports the conclusions of the legislative representatives based on their research. Director Martinez indicated that if an amendment might pass that would cause concern, they are prepared to present their concerns at the General Assembly. President Lurie confirmed that the Board has held many discussions around its legislative priorities and feels the legislative representatives are prepared to represent its interests well. She added that any amendments of concern should be brought to the Board's attention for discussion at the next regular meeting.
  B. Announcements; Inquiries; Reports
Board directors reporting attending District and community events. Director Martinez mentioned that the PTA will be stepping up its efforts to advocate for gun safety, and she would like to follow up on their proposals. President Lurie commented on a new perspective now that she no longer has a student in District schools. Director Tucker commented that she no longer has an elementary-aged student and that the Board may need to more actively put attention on the elementary schools since no board director has a student in this grade band. President Lurie suggested that board members may want to discuss having one or two board directors present at school events to promote dialogue with community members. Community members could be informed in advance of a director's presence. She suggested further that attendance might be coordinated through the PACs (e.g., attendance once a quarter or semester at a building event by a director assigned to that building's PAC). She requested that this topic be added to a future agenda for discussion.
  C. Announce Purpose of Executive Session: to conduct an executive session to discuss litigation or potential litigation pursuant to RCW 42.30.110(1)(i)
President Lurie announced the purpose of the executive session as stated in the agenda. She announced further that the Board would reconvene the regular meeting at 7:50 p.m.
  D. Recess into Executive Session
MSC Martinez/Lee to recess into executive session at 7:27 p.m. Advisory Vote 1-0. Vote 4-0.
Motion passed.
  8. Executive Session - Closed to the Public
A. Conduct Executive Session pursuant to RCW 42.30.110(1)(i)
  B. Adjourn Executive Session
MSC Lee/Martinez to adjourn the executive session at 7:59 p.m. Vote 4-0.
Motion passed.
  9. Adjournment
A. Reconvene Regular Meeting
President Lurie reconvened the regular meeting at 7:59 p.m.
  B. Motion to Adjourn
MSC Lee/Tucker to adjourn the regular meeting at 8:00 p.m. Vote 3-0.
Motion passed.